content/_index.md, before:

---
title: "Chinese Comics in Translation"
type: docs
---

# Chinese Comics in Translation

To provide contemporary readers and researchers with a glimpse into the vast Chinese comic culture, the ChinaComx project publishes a number of exemplary lianhuanhua from the Mao and early post-Mao years with English translations on this webpage. We hope that these translations will spur further interest and research into this diverse, relevant and, very often, entertaining medium.

Thus far, we have published five ChinaComx lianhuanhua translations on this website; these can be grouped into three distinct thematic categories:

1. Works adapted from the writings of Lu Xun:

    - 鲁迅和青年的故事 (1976) is a collection of three poignant stories by Lu Xun: 买书的故事, 一幅木刻的故事, and 最后一次巡礼; [read it in German here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/luxun/);

    - 祝福 (1974) is a lianhuanhua adaptation of Lu Xun's famous critique of tradition and feudalism; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/zhufu/);

2. Tales of youth and socialist-patriotic ideals:
    
    - 雷锋的少年时代 (1973) provides a biographical look at the early years of the socialist icon Lei Feng; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/leifeng/);

    - 泥鳅看瓜 (1974) is a wartime adventure showcasing the bravery of children; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/niqiu/);

    - 无声的战斗 (1976) is a story of a young boy in the PRC helping prevent espionage and sabotage; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/wushengdezhandou/);

3. Transcultural socialist journeys:

    - 表 (1980) is a beloved Soviet children's story adapted for a Chinese audience; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/biao/);

    -  白求恩 (1973) and 白求恩大夫 (1979) are two lianhuanhua adaptations of tales about Norman Bethune;  [read them in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/bethune/).

__And this is just the beginning! We are actively working on new translations, so be sure to visit again soon.__

## Our translation philosophy and choices

Our aim in these translations is to make lianhuanhua available to readers who do not read Chinese themselves. The collection thus is conceptualized in broad terms, offering you lianhuanhua from different periods, about different topics, and in different styles to showcase a widest possible spectrum of lianhuanhua production. We will translate both some of the most well-known and widely-read titles as well as those more obscure, unknown, and otherwise untypical. We also chose to refer to *lianhuanhua* 连环画 simply as lianhuanhua - rather than as "picture stories," "serial pictures," or "Chinese comics" - to both highlight the variety of visual-textual forms that lianhuanhua containes, but also to avoid their definitive categorizing.

We take care to keep our translations as close to the Chinese original as possible, i.e. we privilege faithfulness to the original over elegance in the translated text. Yet, we still want to give readers a feeling of the distinct linguistic style in lianhuanhua, which were normatively catering to readers not fully literate and thus often in simple language and clear and short sentences. Acknowledging the highly political language in many lianhuanhua (in particular, in those published in the high-Maoist era and during the Cultural Revolution), we also strive to translate selected political terms uniquely not only within singular texts, but also across the entire collection. Here, we opt for those translations that are closest in concept to the official line of the CCP at the time as well as following current state of the field usage. 

At the same time, beyond common political and ideological terms or names of institutions, we do not force a website-wide standardization of the translations. This ensures that our translators can keep their own voice and also does justice to the different styles of the individual lianhuanhua. As we are funded by the European Research Council and want to represent the linguistic diversity of the continent and of our team, we also will translate into different European languages (for now: English and German, with translations into French, Slovenian, Spanish, Polish, and more all in the works). 

Quite a few lianhuanhua employ quotations, very often from authoritative figures – and mostly of Mao Zedong. For such, we tend to make use of extant translations. In order to capture the authoritative voice of Mao quotations in particular, we reference the relevant fragments as rendered in the officially published translations of Mao’s (and others) texts by the Foreign Language Press, and as also found on the web (e.g., on marxists.org). In other cases, when the lianhuanhua is based on a translated text itself, we consult the extant English translations and/or the original source text. In all these instances, we provide detailed bibliographical references and/or website links.

All translations presented on this website arise from decisions taken in group discussion and in collaborative translation processes. In doing so, we are joining the ranks of other recent collaborative translation initiatives, such as [Reading the China Dream](https://www.readingthechinadream.com/) or [Revisiting the Revolution](https://networks.h-net.org/group/pages/20033515/revisiting-revolution). We hope you enjoy reading these lianhuanhua in translation – and ask you to bear in mind that these are for educational and research purposes only. 

## Extant and new lianhuanhua translations

During the Mao years, the Foreign Languages Press in Beijing published translations of picture stories and lianhuanhua into English and other foreign languages. Many of these can still be found today in library collections or online repositories (e.g., [here](https://www.bannedthought.net/China/MaoEra/)).

In addition, the 1970s also saw a few independent translations published outside China, most notably in the form of an Italian book published by Gino Nebiolo et al that was then retranslated into English and German; similar translations of excerpts of lianhuanhua into German were also prepared by Wolfgang Bauer and Christoph Harbsmeier:

- *I Fumetti di Mao* (edited by Nebiolo, Gino, Jean Chesneaux, Umberto Eco), Bari: Laterza & Figli, 1971.

- *Das Mädchen aus der Volkskommune* (translated from Italian by Arno Widman, with an introduction by Gino Nebiolo and commentaries by Jean Chesneaux and Umberto Eco): Reinbek: Rowohlt, 1971.

- *The People's Comic Book: Red Women's Detachment, Hot on the Trail and Other Chinese Comics* (translated from Italian by Endymion Wilkinson and Frances Frenaye, with an introduction by Gino Nebiolo), New York: Anchor Press, 1972.

- *Chinesische Comics. Gespenster, Mörder, Klassenfeinde* (translated and edited by Wolfgang Bauer), Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1976.

- *Konfuzius und der Räuber Zhi. Neue chinesische Bildergeschichten* (translated and edited by Christoph Harbsmeier), Frankfurt: Insel Verlag, 1978.

In the recent years, more and more lianhuanhua in new translation appear online:

- *Into the Tiger’s Den* 深入虎穴, adapted from the novel by Qu Bo *Tracks in the Snowy Forest* 林海雪原, translated by Julia Keblinska [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/into-the-tigers-den/).

-  Zhuang Guanyu's manhua version of the *Journey to the West* 西遊漫記,  translated by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/manhua-journey-west-part-1-6/).

- One of the Chinese lianhuanhua adaptations of Star Wars, translated by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/chinese-star-wars-comic-part-1-6).

- A lianhuanhua adaptation of the science fiction story *Little Smarty Travels to the Future* 小灵通漫游未来 by Ye Yonglie, translated by Lena Henningsen et al [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/little-smarty-travels-to-the-future), as well as translated in part by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/little-smarty-visits-the-future-a-science-fiction-novel-part-1-of-6/).

-  A lianhuanhua adaptation of the scar literature short story *Maple* 枫 by Zheng Yi, translated by Lena Henningsen and Joschua Seiler [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/maple).

- A lianhuanhua biography of Sun Yatsen 孙中山, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20150628051506/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/dr-sun-yat-sen-sun-zhongs).

-  A short lianhuanhua adaptation of *The Cowherd and Weaving Maiden* 牛郎織女 legend, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20141026010208/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/the-cowherd-and-weaving-maiden/).

- A fourteen-chapter lianhuanhua version of the *Water Margin* 水滸傳, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20141026053520/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/water-margin/).

...as well as on this website!

## Acknowledgements

This webpage was initially set up by Duncan Paterson, Gu Qin, and Damian Mandzunowski as part of a proof of concept arising from work conducted with support from the ERC-funded project [“The Politics of Reading in the People’s Republic of China”](https://readchina.github.io/) (READCHINA, grant agreement no. 757365). The translations published here until 2023 originated as joint translation projects by students at the [Institute of Chinese Studies, University of Freiburg](https://uni-freiburg.de/sinologie/), supervised by Lena Henningsen. Students from FU Berlin, supervised by Dominik Weihrauch, also contributed translations during this phase.

Since 2024, the webpage is maintained by Damian Mandzunowski and the ERC-funded project [“Comics Culture in the People’s Republic of China”](https://chinacomx.github.io/) (ChinaComx, grant agreement no. 101088049) at the [Institute of Chinese Studies, Heidelberg University](https://www.zo.uni-heidelberg.de/de/china).

Special thanks go to our colleagues Matthias Arnold and Hanno Lecher from the [Centre for Asian and Transcultural Studies (CATS), Heidelberg University](https://www.cats.uni-heidelberg.de/) for providing us with high resolution scans of the lianhuanhua, part of the [CATS-Seifert Collection of Chinese Comics](https://www.cats.uni-heidelberg.de/library/collections/chinese.html) — as well to Andreas Seifert for donating his collection to Heidelberg University in the first place.

We have taken much effort to contact the publishers of the respective comics in order to acquire permission by the copyright holder to publish the pages online. We regret that we have not received responses to our inquiries. If you believe that copyrights are not being respected, please [send us an email](mailto:chinacomx.erc@gmail.com) or get in touch using the [contact page](https://chinacomx.github.io/contact/). We will respond as soon as possible and will work with you to either accredit the material correctly or remove it entirely. 

The ChinaComx Team and collaborating translators

(last update: 13 October 2025)

Commit message:

Revise published translations count in _index.md
Updated the number of published translations and stories on the website.

content/_index.md, after:

---
title: "Chinese Comics in Translation"
type: docs
---

# Chinese Comics in Translation

To provide contemporary readers and researchers with a glimpse into the vast Chinese comic culture, the ChinaComx project publishes a number of exemplary lianhuanhua from the Mao and early post-Mao years with English translations on this webpage. We hope that these translations will spur further interest and research into this diverse, relevant and, very often, entertaining medium.

Thus far, we have published on this website seven ChinaComx translations of in total ten lianhuanhua stories; these can be grouped into three distinct thematic categories:

1. Works adapted from the writings of Lu Xun:

    - 鲁迅和青年的故事 (1976) is a collection of three poignant stories by Lu Xun: 买书的故事, 一幅木刻的故事, and 最后一次巡礼; [read it in German here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/luxun/);

    - 祝福 (1974) is a lianhuanhua adaptation of Lu Xun's famous critique of tradition and feudalism; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/zhufu/);

2. Tales of youth and socialist-patriotic ideals:
    
    - 雷锋的少年时代 (1973) provides a biographical look at the early years of the socialist icon Lei Feng; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/leifeng/);

    - 泥鳅看瓜 (1974) is a wartime adventure showcasing the bravery of children; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/niqiu/);

    - 无声的战斗 (1976) is a story of a young boy in the PRC helping prevent espionage and sabotage; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/wushengdezhandou/);

3. Transcultural socialist journeys:

    - 表 (1980) is a beloved Soviet children's story adapted for a Chinese audience; [read it in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/biao/);

    -  白求恩 (1973) and 白求恩大夫 (1979) are two lianhuanhua adaptations of tales about Norman Bethune;  [read them in English here](https://chinacomx.github.io/translations/bethune/).

__And this is just the beginning! We are actively working on new translations, so be sure to visit again soon.__

## Our translation philosophy and choices

Our aim in these translations is to make lianhuanhua available to readers who do not read Chinese themselves. The collection thus is conceptualized in broad terms, offering you lianhuanhua from different periods, about different topics, and in different styles to showcase a widest possible spectrum of lianhuanhua production. We will translate both some of the most well-known and widely-read titles as well as those more obscure, unknown, and otherwise untypical. We also chose to refer to *lianhuanhua* 连环画 simply as lianhuanhua - rather than as "picture stories," "serial pictures," or "Chinese comics" - to both highlight the variety of visual-textual forms that lianhuanhua containes, but also to avoid their definitive categorizing.

We take care to keep our translations as close to the Chinese original as possible, i.e. we privilege faithfulness to the original over elegance in the translated text. Yet, we still want to give readers a feeling of the distinct linguistic style in lianhuanhua, which were normatively catering to readers not fully literate and thus often in simple language and clear and short sentences. Acknowledging the highly political language in many lianhuanhua (in particular, in those published in the high-Maoist era and during the Cultural Revolution), we also strive to translate selected political terms uniquely not only within singular texts, but also across the entire collection. Here, we opt for those translations that are closest in concept to the official line of the CCP at the time as well as following current state of the field usage. 

At the same time, beyond common political and ideological terms or names of institutions, we do not force a website-wide standardization of the translations. This ensures that our translators can keep their own voice and also does justice to the different styles of the individual lianhuanhua. As we are funded by the European Research Council and want to represent the linguistic diversity of the continent and of our team, we also will translate into different European languages (for now: English and German, with translations into French, Slovenian, Spanish, Polish, and more all in the works). 

Quite a few lianhuanhua employ quotations, very often from authoritative figures – and mostly of Mao Zedong. For such, we tend to make use of extant translations. In order to capture the authoritative voice of Mao quotations in particular, we reference the relevant fragments as rendered in the officially published translations of Mao’s (and others) texts by the Foreign Language Press, and as also found on the web (e.g., on marxists.org). In other cases, when the lianhuanhua is based on a translated text itself, we consult the extant English translations and/or the original source text. In all these instances, we provide detailed bibliographical references and/or website links.

All translations presented on this website arise from decisions taken in group discussion and in collaborative translation processes. In doing so, we are joining the ranks of other recent collaborative translation initiatives, such as [Reading the China Dream](https://www.readingthechinadream.com/) or [Revisiting the Revolution](https://networks.h-net.org/group/pages/20033515/revisiting-revolution). We hope you enjoy reading these lianhuanhua in translation – and ask you to bear in mind that these are for educational and research purposes only. 

## Extant and new lianhuanhua translations

During the Mao years, the Foreign Languages Press in Beijing published translations of picture stories and lianhuanhua into English and other foreign languages. Many of these can still be found today in library collections or online repositories (e.g., [here](https://www.bannedthought.net/China/MaoEra/)).

In addition, the 1970s also saw a few independent translations published outside China, most notably in the form of an Italian book published by Gino Nebiolo et al that was then retranslated into English and German; similar translations of excerpts of lianhuanhua into German were also prepared by Wolfgang Bauer and Christoph Harbsmeier:

- *I Fumetti di Mao* (edited by Nebiolo, Gino, Jean Chesneaux, Umberto Eco), Bari: Laterza & Figli, 1971.

- *Das Mädchen aus der Volkskommune* (translated from Italian by Arno Widman, with an introduction by Gino Nebiolo and commentaries by Jean Chesneaux and Umberto Eco): Reinbek: Rowohlt, 1971.

- *The People's Comic Book: Red Women's Detachment, Hot on the Trail and Other Chinese Comics* (translated from Italian by Endymion Wilkinson and Frances Frenaye, with an introduction by Gino Nebiolo), New York: Anchor Press, 1972.

- *Chinesische Comics. Gespenster, Mörder, Klassenfeinde* (translated and edited by Wolfgang Bauer), Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1976.

- *Konfuzius und der Räuber Zhi. Neue chinesische Bildergeschichten* (translated and edited by Christoph Harbsmeier), Frankfurt: Insel Verlag, 1978.

In the recent years, more and more lianhuanhua in new translation appear online:

- *Into the Tiger’s Den* 深入虎穴, adapted from the novel by Qu Bo *Tracks in the Snowy Forest* 林海雪原, translated by Julia Keblinska [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/into-the-tigers-den/).

-  Zhuang Guanyu's manhua version of the *Journey to the West* 西遊漫記,  translated by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/manhua-journey-west-part-1-6/).

- One of the Chinese lianhuanhua adaptations of Star Wars, translated by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/chinese-star-wars-comic-part-1-6).

- A lianhuanhua adaptation of the science fiction story *Little Smarty Travels to the Future* 小灵通漫游未来 by Ye Yonglie, translated by Lena Henningsen et al [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/little-smarty-travels-to-the-future), as well as translated in part by Nick Stember [here](https://www.nickstember.com/little-smarty-visits-the-future-a-science-fiction-novel-part-1-of-6/).

-  A lianhuanhua adaptation of the scar literature short story *Maple* 枫 by Zheng Yi, translated by Lena Henningsen and Joschua Seiler [here](https://u.osu.edu/mclc/online-series/maple).

- A lianhuanhua biography of Sun Yatsen 孙中山, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20150628051506/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/dr-sun-yat-sen-sun-zhongs).

-  A short lianhuanhua adaptation of *The Cowherd and Weaving Maiden* 牛郎織女 legend, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20141026010208/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/the-cowherd-and-weaving-maiden/).

- A fourteen-chapter lianhuanhua version of the *Water Margin* 水滸傳, translated by Stephen Kow [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20141026053520/http://hilianhuanhua.org/home/read-the-books-online/water-margin/).

...as well as on this website!

## Acknowledgements

This webpage was initially set up by Duncan Paterson, Gu Qin, and Damian Mandzunowski as part of a proof of concept arising from work conducted with support from the ERC-funded project [“The Politics of Reading in the People’s Republic of China”](https://readchina.github.io/) (READCHINA, grant agreement no. 757365). The translations published here until 2023 originated as joint translation projects by students at the [Institute of Chinese Studies, University of Freiburg](https://uni-freiburg.de/sinologie/), supervised by Lena Henningsen. Students from FU Berlin, supervised by Dominik Weihrauch, also contributed translations during this phase.

Since 2024, the webpage is maintained by Damian Mandzunowski and the ERC-funded project [“Comics Culture in the People’s Republic of China”](https://chinacomx.github.io/) (ChinaComx, grant agreement no. 101088049) at the [Institute of Chinese Studies, Heidelberg University](https://www.zo.uni-heidelberg.de/de/china).

Special thanks go to our colleagues Matthias Arnold and Hanno Lecher from the [Centre for Asian and Transcultural Studies (CATS), Heidelberg University](https://www.cats.uni-heidelberg.de/) for providing us with high resolution scans of the lianhuanhua, part of the [CATS-Seifert Collection of Chinese Comics](https://www.cats.uni-heidelberg.de/library/collections/chinese.html) — as well to Andreas Seifert for donating his collection to Heidelberg University in the first place.

We have taken much effort to contact the publishers of the respective comics in order to acquire permission by the copyright holder to publish the pages online. We regret that we have not received responses to our inquiries. If you believe that copyrights are not being respected, please [send us an email](mailto:chinacomx.erc@gmail.com) or get in touch using the [contact page](https://chinacomx.github.io/contact/). We will respond as soon as possible and will work with you to either accredit the material correctly or remove it entirely. 

The ChinaComx Team and collaborating translators

(last update: 13 October 2025)
